# Sanskrit affixes in Indonesian


Information and examples are from [Jones ](sources.bib?label=Jones+#cldf:jones1984a)([1984](sources.bib?label=1984#cldf:jones1984a)), [Verhaar ](sources.bib?label=Verhaar+#cldf:verhaar1984a)([1984](sources.bib?label=1984#cldf:verhaar1984a)), [Tadmor ](sources.bib?label=Tadmor+#cldf:tadmor2009a)([2009](sources.bib?label=2009#cldf:tadmor2009a)), and personal communication with Uri Tadmor, David Gil, John Bowden, and a number of Indonesians working at the Jakarta Field Station of the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in 2011, additionally supplemented with a number of hybrid formations and etymological details from Wiktionary (https://en.wiktionary.org/, accessed: 18.06.2024]). [Jones ](sources.bib?label=Jones+#cldf:jones1984a)([1984](sources.bib?label=1984#cldf:jones1984a):7) states that “some half dozen affixes derived from Sanskrit are productive; most have come into vogue within the last few decades”. All of these are also mentioned by [Verhaar ](sources.bib?label=Verhaar+#cldf:verhaar1984a)([1984](sources.bib?label=1984#cldf:verhaar1984a):20–21), who gives many more. Below, only affixes that are attested in hybrid formations, i.e. with non-Sanskrit stems, are given.


16 miscellaneous nominal prefixes with non-Sanskrit stems are attested (most of them native Indonesian, some from Javanese)

- _adi_- ‘super’, according to [Verhaar ](sources.bib?label=Verhaar+#cldf:verhaar1984a)([1984](sources.bib?label=1984#cldf:verhaar1984a):20–21) an affix of Sanskrit origin, compatible with native Indonesian stems, e.g. _adibintang_ (_bintang_ ‘star’) ‘superstar’, _adipenghantar_ (_penghantar_ ‘conductor’) ‘superconductor’. It also combines with stems of other origins, e.g. _adikuasa_ (_kuasa_ ‘power’) ‘superpower’ (the stem is also borrowed from Sanskrit, but this noun was formed in Indonesian).
- _antar_- ‘inter’, according to [Verhaar ](sources.bib?label=Verhaar+#cldf:verhaar1984a)([1984](sources.bib?label=1984#cldf:verhaar1984a):20–21) an affix of Sanskrit origin which has become productive according to [Jones ](sources.bib?label=Jones+#cldf:jones1984a)([1984](sources.bib?label=1984#cldf:jones1984a):7). It may be a free form rather than a prefix, e.g. _antar suku_ ‘intertribal’, _antar kelompok_ ‘inter-group’.
- _catur_- ‘four’, according to [Verhaar ](sources.bib?label=Verhaar+#cldf:verhaar1984a)([1984](sources.bib?label=1984#cldf:verhaar1984a):20–21) an affix of Sanskrit origin, e.g. _caturwulan_ (_wulan_ ‘month’ is Javanese) ‘four monthly’.
- _dwi_- ‘two’, according to [Verhaar ](sources.bib?label=Verhaar+#cldf:verhaar1984a)([1984](sources.bib?label=1984#cldf:verhaar1984a):20–21) an affix of Sanskrit origin, e.g. _dwihari_ (_hari_ ‘day’) ‘lasting two days, two-day’, _dwirumah_ (_rumah_ ‘house’) ‘dioecy’. It also combines with stems of non-native non-Sanskrit origin, showing that the prefix is productive, e.g. _dwifungsi_ (_fungsi_ ‘function’, from Dutch) ‘bifunctional’.
- _eka_- ‘one’, according to [Verhaar ](sources.bib?label=Verhaar+#cldf:verhaar1984a)([1984](sources.bib?label=1984#cldf:verhaar1984a):20–21) an affix of Sanskrit origin, e.g. _eka bahasa_ ‘monolingual’ – the stem is Sanskrit, but the derivation was coined in Indonesian.
- _maha_- ‘very (important person)’, according to [Verhaar ](sources.bib?label=Verhaar+#cldf:verhaar1984a)([1984](sources.bib?label=1984#cldf:verhaar1984a):20–21) an affix of Sanskrit origin, e.g. _mahabesar_ (_besar_ ‘big’) ‘almighty’. Aside from its use as a prefix, this form apparently also exists as a free form, e.g. _maha pelit_ (_pelit_ ‘stingy’) ‘very stingy’ (examples provided by Uri Tadmor, personal communication, 2011).
- _nir_- ‘privative, without, free from’, e.g. _nirkabel_ (_kabel_ ‘cable’, stem probably Dutch-derived) ‘wireless’. Has become productive according to [Jones ](sources.bib?label=Jones+#cldf:jones1984a)([1984](sources.bib?label=1984#cldf:jones1984a):7). Another example is _nirlaba_ (_laba_ ‘profit’, Sanskrit-derived stem) ‘non-profit’, which was likely coined in Indonesian.
- _pasca_- ‘post-, after’, e.g. _pascapanen_ (_panen_ ‘harvest’) ‘post-harvest’, _pascamakan_ (_makan_ ‘to eat’) ‘post-meal tea’. Also, there is at least one formation with a Sanskrit stem, though it was likely coined in Indonesian, e.g. _pasca sarjana_ ‘postgraduate’.
- _pra_- ‘pre’, only a few words are formed with this and other affixes, which are part of the learned vocabulary, according to [Mueller ](sources.bib?label=Mueller+#cldf:mueller2007a)([2007](sources.bib?label=2007#cldf:mueller2007a):1220). According to [Verhaar ](sources.bib?label=Verhaar+#cldf:verhaar1984a)([1984](sources.bib?label=1984#cldf:verhaar1984a):20–21), it is an affix of Sanskrit origin and has become productive on native stems ([Jones 1984](sources.bib?label=Jones+1984#cldf:jones1984a):7), e.g. _prabayar_ ‘prepaid’ (among others), and on Sanskrit-derived stems, e.g. _pra sarjana_ ‘undergraduate’.
- _purna_- ‘after’, according to [Verhaar ](sources.bib?label=Verhaar+#cldf:verhaar1984a)([1984](sources.bib?label=1984#cldf:verhaar1984a):20–21) an affix of Sanskrit origin, e.g. _purna jual_ (_jual_ ‘sale’) ‘after sales service’, _purnajabatan_ (_jabatan_ ‘position, post, function’) ‘previous position’.
- _sapta_- ‘seven’, according to [Verhaar ](sources.bib?label=Verhaar+#cldf:verhaar1984a)([1984](sources.bib?label=1984#cldf:verhaar1984a):20–21) an affix of Sanskrit origin, e.g. _sapta pesona_ (_pesona_ ‘charm’ of uncertain origin) ‘having seven charms’.
- _serba_- ‘various’, according to [Verhaar ](sources.bib?label=Verhaar+#cldf:verhaar1984a)([1984](sources.bib?label=1984#cldf:verhaar1984a):20–21) an affix of Sanskrit origin, which has become productive according to [Jones ](sources.bib?label=Jones+#cldf:jones1984a)([1984](sources.bib?label=1984#cldf:jones1984a):7), e.g. _serba ada_ (_ada_ ‘to have, exist’) ‘having everything’, _serba salah_ (_salah_ ‘wrong’) ‘always wrong’ (examples provided by Uri Tadmor, personal communication, 2011).
- _swa_- ‘self’, according to [Verhaar ](sources.bib?label=Verhaar+#cldf:verhaar1984a)([1984](sources.bib?label=1984#cldf:verhaar1984a):20–21) an affix of Sanskrit origin, which has become productive according to [Jones ](sources.bib?label=Jones+#cldf:jones1984a)([1984](sources.bib?label=1984#cldf:jones1984a):7), e.g. _swabakar_ (_bakar_ ‘to burn’) ‘self-immolate’, _swalayan_ (_layan(an)_ ‘service’) ‘supermarket, literally self-service’.
- _tata_- ‘order, arrangement’, has become productive according to [Jones ](sources.bib?label=Jones+#cldf:jones1984a)([1984](sources.bib?label=1984#cldf:jones1984a):7), being attested with native stems e.g., _tata ruang_ ‘interior’. It is also found with other foreign non-Sanskrit stems, e.g. _tata tertib_ ‘law and order’, and likewise with Sanskrit-derived stems in what seem to be neologisms coined in Indonesian, e.g. _tata boga_ ‘table manners’.
- _tri_- ‘three’, e.g. _triwulan_ (_wulan_ ‘month’ from Javanese) ‘three monthly’, _triwarna_ (_warna_ ‘color’ from Sanskrit) ‘three colors’. According to [Verhaar ](sources.bib?label=Verhaar+#cldf:verhaar1984a)([1984](sources.bib?label=1984#cldf:verhaar1984a):20–21) this affix is of Sanskrit origin.
- _tuna_- ‘struck, hurt, cut’, according to [Verhaar ](sources.bib?label=Verhaar+#cldf:verhaar1984a)([1984](sources.bib?label=1984#cldf:verhaar1984a):20–21) an affix of Sanskrit origin, e.g. _tunarungu_ (_rungu_ ‘to hear’, from Javanese) ‘deaf’ (example provided by Uri Tadmor, personal communication, 2011).



2 agent or profession noun derivational suffixes

- -_wan_ ‘masculine agent or profession noun’, reasonably common according to [Mueller ](sources.bib?label=Mueller+#cldf:mueller2007a)([2007](sources.bib?label=2007#cldf:mueller2007a):1220) and [Jones ](sources.bib?label=Jones+#cldf:jones1984a)([1984](sources.bib?label=1984#cldf:jones1984a):7), it is also mentioned by [Tadmor ](sources.bib?label=Tadmor+#cldf:tadmor2009a)([2009](sources.bib?label=2009#cldf:tadmor2009a):705), e.g. _peragawan_ (_peraga_ ‘display’) ‘male model’, _rimbawan_ (_rimba_ ‘jungle’) ‘forester’. It is also attested with non-native non-Sanskrit stems, e.g. _kamerawan_ (_kamera_ ‘camera’) ‘male cameraman’. According to [Mueller ](sources.bib?label=Mueller+#cldf:mueller2007a)([2007](sources.bib?label=2007#cldf:mueller2007a):1220), -_man_ is an allomorph of -_wan._
- -_wati_ ‘feminine agent or profession noun’, reasonably common according to [Mueller ](sources.bib?label=Mueller+#cldf:mueller2007a)([2007](sources.bib?label=2007#cldf:mueller2007a):1220) and [Jones ](sources.bib?label=Jones+#cldf:jones1984a)([1984](sources.bib?label=1984#cldf:jones1984a):7), also mentioned by [Tadmor ](sources.bib?label=Tadmor+#cldf:tadmor2009a)([2009](sources.bib?label=2009#cldf:tadmor2009a):705), e.g. _peragawati_ ‘female model’, _kamerawati_ ‘female cameraman’.

