# Hindi affixes in Kurux


Information and examples are from [Mishra ](sources.bib?label=Mishra+#cldf:mishra1996a)([1996](sources.bib?label=1996#cldf:mishra1996a)). Only affixes for which there are indications that they are used on native stems are given in the following.


4 adjectivizers. About these four, [Mishra ](sources.bib?label=Mishra+#cldf:mishra1996a)([1996](sources.bib?label=1996#cldf:mishra1996a):98) explicitly states that they are borrowed and productive, [Mishra ](sources.bib?label=Mishra+#cldf:mishra1996a)([1996](sources.bib?label=1996#cldf:mishra1996a):48–51) gives many other affixes, about which this is not explicitly stated.

- _-ū_ ‘adjectivizer’, e.g. _pīṭū_ ‘fatal’ (from _pīṭ_ ‘to kill’)
- _-hā_ ‘adjectivizer’, e.g. _bhūthā_ ‘haunted’ (from _bhūt_ ‘ghost’)
- _-yā_ ‘adjectivizer’, e.g. _banyā_ ‘wild’ (from _ban_ ‘forest’)
- _-al_ ‘adjectivizer’, e.g. _ḍubal_ ‘drowned’ (from _ḍub-_ ‘to drown’)



1 gender marker, assuming that the following forms are phonologically conditioned allomorphs

- _-ī, -in, -āin, -nī_ ‘feminine’, e.g. _āl-i_ ‘girl’ (vs. _ālas_ ‘boy’) ([Abbi 1995b](sources.bib?label=Abbi+1995b#cldf:abbi1995b):4; 2001:47; [Gardani 2012](sources.bib?label=Gardani+2012#cldf:gardani2012a):83). These are “directly borrowed from Indo-Aryan. The suffixes are mostly added to the borrowed nouns” ([Mishra 1996](sources.bib?label=Mishra+1996#cldf:mishra1996a):96, see also 21-22), but not exclusively (see also [Abbi 1997](sources.bib?label=Abbi+1997#cldf:abbi1997a):142).



2 forms deriving special numerals. The “suffixes _khēp_ and _bahrī_ are used to form enumerative/proportional numerals [...] the suffix _-ō_ forming adjectival constructions from numerals” ([Mishra 1996](sources.bib?label=Mishra+1996#cldf:mishra1996a):96–97). Examples of -_khēp_ and _-bahrī_ are given in [Mishra ](sources.bib?label=Mishra+#cldf:mishra1996a)([1996](sources.bib?label=1996#cldf:mishra1996a):32), where they are also written as suffixes. Numerals one to four are indigenous Kurux ([Mishra 1996](sources.bib?label=Mishra+1996#cldf:mishra1996a):30). There are examples of _-ō_ and -_khēp_ in combination with numerals lower than five, but all examples of _-bahrī_ are with the borrowed numerals five or higher, therefore _-bahrī_ is not included here.

- _-khēp_ ‘enumerative/proportional numerals’, e.g. _ōnd khēp_ ‘once’
- _-ō_ ‘adjectives from numerals’, e.g. _tin-ō_ ‘all the three’



1 passive marker

- _-r/-tār_ ‘passive’, e.g. _cōx-tār/cōx-r_ ‘to be plucked’ (from _cōx_ ‘to pluck’), _la’ō-tār/la’ō-r_ ‘to be beaten up’ (from _la’ō_ ‘to beat someone up’). [Abbi ](sources.bib?label=Abbi+#cldf:abbi1997a)([1997](sources.bib?label=1997#cldf:abbi1997a):140) explicitly claims this form is borrowed from Indo-Aryan. [Mishra ](sources.bib?label=Mishra+#cldf:mishra1996a)([1996](sources.bib?label=1996#cldf:mishra1996a):108) discusses this form and says that the passive arose from contact with Indo-Aryan, but does not say explicitly that the form _-r/-tār_ would be borrowed.


[Abbi ](sources.bib?label=Abbi+#cldf:abbi1997a)([1997](sources.bib?label=1997#cldf:abbi1997a):140, 142) mentions that the two Indo-Aryan “conjunctive participles” _-ar_ and _-ki_ would be used in urban Kurux. Because they are written as separate words by [Abbi ](sources.bib?label=Abbi+#cldf:abbi1997a)([1997](sources.bib?label=1997#cldf:abbi1997a):140), and also because no corresponding forms were found in [Mishra ](sources.bib?label=Mishra+#cldf:mishra1996a)([1996](sources.bib?label=1996#cldf:mishra1996a)), they are not considered here.
