# Persian affixes in Turkish


Information and examples are from [Göksel and Kerslake ](sources.bib?label=G%C3%B6ksel+and+Kerslake+#cldf:goeksel2005a)([2005](sources.bib?label=2005#cldf:goeksel2005a)), [Vietze, Zenker, and Warnke ](sources.bib?label=Vietze%2C+Zenker%2C+and+Warnke+#cldf:vietze1975a)([1975](sources.bib?label=1975#cldf:vietze1975a)), [Kubiyak ](sources.bib?label=Kubiyak+#cldf:kubiyak2004a)([2004](sources.bib?label=2004#cldf:kubiyak2004a)), [Memoglu-Süleymanoglu ](sources.bib?label=Memoglu-S%C3%BCleymanoglu+#cldf:memoglu_sueleymanoglu2006a)([2006](sources.bib?label=2006#cldf:memoglu_sueleymanoglu2006a)), [Nişanyan ](sources.bib?label=Ni%C5%9Fanyan+#cldf:ni2009a)([2009](sources.bib?label=2009#cldf:ni2009a)), [Zengin ](sources.bib?label=Zengin+#cldf:zengin2009a)([2009](sources.bib?label=2009#cldf:zengin2009a)), and personal communication from Jaklin Kornfilt, as well as [Kornfilt ](sources.bib?label=Kornfilt+#cldf:kornfilt1997a)([1997](sources.bib?label=1997#cldf:kornfilt1997a):463–465). During the Ottoman Empire (13th-19th century), there was a heavy influence from Arabic (especially in religious styles) and Persian (especially in literary styles), particularly in higher and educated registers ([Göksel and Kerslake 2005](sources.bib?label=G%C3%B6ksel+and+Kerslake+2005#cldf:goeksel2005a):xxv–xxviii). Since 1911 there is a movement to clear Turkish of Arabic and Persian influence and “words containing Arabic and Persian suffixes are increasingly giving way to their synonyms of Turkish origin” ([Göksel and Kerslake 2005](sources.bib?label=G%C3%B6ksel+and+Kerslake+2005#cldf:goeksel2005a):59). The following examples were compiled with the help of Sabine Günther. Only affixes that are attested with Turkish stems are given, there are also Persian affixes that are only used with Persian stems.


6 noun-forming suffixes (including one forming nouns and adjectives)

- _-baz_ ‘agent or occupation noun’, e.g. _madrabaz_ ‘swindler’ (from _mandıra_ ‘small cheesery’), _dilbaz_ ‘somebody who’s good with words’ (from _dil_ ‘tongue, language’), _davlumbaz_ ‘shrouding, chimney hood, paddle box’ (from _davul_ ‘drum’), _düzenbaz_ ‘cheater’ (from _düzen_ ‘regulation, scheme’), _oyunbaz_ ‘playful person’ (from _oyun_ ‘play, game, jest, trick’), _kuşbaz_ ‘raiser, trainer, or seller of birds’ (from _kuş_ ‘bird’)
- _-dan_ (various noun derivations), e.g. _yağdan(lık)_ ‘lubricator’ (from _yağ_ ‘oil’), _sonradan_ ‘afterwards’ (from _sonra_ ‘after, later’), _yaradan_ ‘the Creator’ (from _yara_ ‘injury’)
- _-(h)ane_ ‘place noun derivation’, e.g. _balıkhane_ ‘fish market’ (from _balık_ ‘fish’), _boyahane_ ‘dyeing factory’ (from _boya_ ‘dye’), _yemekhane_ ‘dining room’ (from _yemek_ ‘food’)
- _-kar_ ‘a person associated with a profession or occupation and other derivations’, e.g. _koçkar_ ‘a ram that was raised for fighting’ (from _koç_ ‘ram’), _buzulkar_ ‘fern’ (from _buzul_ ‘glacier’)
- _-zede_ ‘victims of a catastrophic event’, e.g. _depremzede_ ‘earthquake victim’ (from _deprem_ ‘earthquake’), _sınavzede_ ‘student who suffers from exams’ (from _sınav_ ‘test, examination’)
- _-dar_ ‘agent noun derivation’, e.g. _bayraktar_ ‘standard-bearer’ (from _bayrak_ ‘flag’), _sancaktar_ ‘standard-bearer’ (from _sancak_ ‘flag’)



1 adjective-forming suffix (plus one forming nouns and adjectives, see above)

- _-vari_ ‘adjectivizer’, e.g. _yengeçvari_ ‘crab-like’ (from _yengeç_ ‘crab’), _Türkvari_ ‘Turk-like’ (from _Türk_ ‘Turk’). There are also many new formations based on non-Turkish stems, e.g. _gangstervari_ ‘gangsterlike’, _Amerikanvari_ ‘American-style’.


Note that none of the very many derivational suffixes attaching to verbs were borrowed and also no suffixes that attach to nominals to form verbs ([Göksel and Kerslake 2005](sources.bib?label=G%C3%B6ksel+and+Kerslake+2005#cldf:goeksel2005a):53–57). Note also that the set of Persian affixes in Azari (closely related to Turkish) is different.
