# Persian affixes in Kashmiri


The information and examples given below are taken from [Koul ](sources.bib?label=Koul+#cldf:koul2005a)([2005](sources.bib?label=2005#cldf:koul2005a):156–158), which is the most recent one of the three descriptions available to me. [Koul ](sources.bib?label=Koul+#cldf:koul2005a)([2005](sources.bib?label=2005#cldf:koul2005a):156–158) describes morphological borrowing in a section explicitly about borrowed morphology, and the affixes given below are explicitly described as combining with Kashmiri stems, even though this is in contradiction to an earlier description ([Wali and Koul 1996](sources.bib?label=Wali+and+Koul+1996#cldf:wali1996a):265) in at least one case, as noted below. [Bhat ](sources.bib?label=Bhat+#cldf:bhat1987a)([1987](sources.bib?label=1987#cldf:bhat1987a)) and [Wali &amp; Koul ](sources.bib?label=Wali+%26+Koul+#cldf:wali1996a)([1996](sources.bib?label=1996#cldf:wali1996a)) list a lot more Persian affixes than [Koul ](sources.bib?label=Koul+#cldf:koul2005a)([2005](sources.bib?label=2005#cldf:koul2005a):156–158), but they are less explicit about whether the forms they give are used with Kashmiri stems.


5 derivational prefixes. It is uncertain whether the results are nouns, adjectives or may be both.

- _be-_ ‘without’, e.g. _bepatsh_ ‘untrustworthy,’ _bezuv_ ‘without life’, _bevəti:r_ ‘without manners’. [Wali &amp; Koul ](sources.bib?label=Wali+%26+Koul+#cldf:wali1996a)([1996](sources.bib?label=1996#cldf:wali1996a):265) confirm that this prefix is used with native stems.
- _ba:-_ ‘with’, e.g. _ba:darɨm_ ‘with religious piety’
- _har-_ ‘every’, e.g. _harkã:h_ ‘every one’, _harja:yi_ ‘every place’
- _kam-_ ‘little’, e.g. _kamza:n_ ‘a little acquainted person’
- _bar-_ ‘on’, e.g. _barz’av_ ‘on the tip of the tongue’


Note that there is also _bad-_ ‘bad’, e.g. _badza:th_ ‘bad character’, but [Wali &amp; Koul ](sources.bib?label=Wali+%26+Koul+#cldf:wali1996a)([1996](sources.bib?label=1996#cldf:wali1996a):265) state that this prefix is only used with Persian stems, therefore it is excluded here.


2 suffixes deriving agent nouns

- _-gor_ ‘agent noun’, e.g. _g’avangor_ ‘one who sings’, _gindangor_ ‘one who plays’, _natsangor_ ‘one who dances’
- -_ci:_ ‘agent noun’, e.g. _tabalci:_ ‘one who plays on tabla’, _ə:phi:mci_ ‘one who is addicted to opium’



2 suffixes deriving abstract nouns

- _-gi:_ ‘abstract noun’, e.g. _ga:nɨgi:_ ‘the act of procurer’, _badma:šɨgi:_ ‘the act of a rogue’
- _-i:_ ‘abstract nouns derived from nouns of agency’, e.g. _ma:sṭar_ ‘teacher’ vs. _ma:sṭəri:_ ‘teachership’, _aphsar_ ‘officer’ vs. _aphsari:_ ‘officership’, _da:kṭar_ ‘doctor’ vs. _ḍa:kṭəri:_ ‘medical practice’, _ci:n_ ‘China’ vs. _ci:ni:_ ‘Chinese’



4 suffixes deriving adjectives from nouns

- _-ba:z_ ‘adjectivizer’, e.g. _do:khɨba:z_ ‘deceitful’, _ca:lda:z_ ‘crafty’
- _-mand_ ‘adjectivizer’, e.g. _phə:ydɨmand_ ‘useful’, _akɨlmand_ ‘wise’, _do:latmand_ ‘rich’
- _-za:d__ɨ_ ‘adjectivizer’, e.g. _darza:dɨ_ ‘an offspring of Dars’
- _-da:r_ ‘adjectivizer “with x”‘, e.g. _ləṭ’da:r_ ‘with tail’, _chiṭida:r_ ‘with prints’. [Koul ](sources.bib?label=Koul+#cldf:koul2005a)([2005](sources.bib?label=2005#cldf:koul2005a):157) gives this as an example of a combination of a Kashmiri prefix and Persian stem, but this is apparently the same as _-da:r_ described by [Bhat ](sources.bib?label=Bhat+#cldf:bhat1987a)([1987](sources.bib?label=1987#cldf:bhat1987a):88), who describes it as “added to nouns, common and productive” and gives examples such as “land lord, leader, honest” which suggest that _-da:r_ might be glossed as ‘with’.

