# Turkic affixes in Middle Mongolic


Information and examples are from [Schönig ](sources.bib?label=Sch%C3%B6nig+#cldf:schoenig2003a)([2003](sources.bib?label=2003#cldf:schoenig2003a)). Note that many of the features concerned may be much older than Middle Mongolic.


3 case markers

- &ast;_-lUx-A_ ‘comitative’, based on the Turkic suffix &ast;_-lVg_ for possessive adjectival nouns, as in Turkic &ast;_at-lïg_ ‘with a horse’. The same Turkic suffix appears with a derivative function as a later borrowing in Middle Mongol, e.g. Middle Mongol _miqa-liq_ ‘corpulent’ (from _miqa/n_ ‘flesh’).
- &ast;_-cAA_ ‘terminative’, rarely used, may be a borrowing from the Turkic equative in &ast;_-cA_ (‘as’); a connection of the latter with the Mongolic primary ablative in &ast;_-cA_ is also possible but less likely.
- &ast;_-ki_ ‘secondary nominative’, has a cognate in Turkic and is probably of Turkic origin.


Other Mongolic case suffixes that have been compared with Turkic include the locative in &ast;_-A_ (cf. the Turkic dative in &ast;_-GA_), the dative (dative-locative) in &ast;_-D-A_ (cf. the Turkic locative in &ast;_-DA_), and the accusative in &ast;_-g_ (only in Mongol proper, Ordos, Oirat, and Kalmuck, cf. the Turkic accusative in &ast;_-G_). All of these comparisons involve, however, considerable linguistic problems.


1 plural suffix

- &ast;_-s_ ‘plural’ (&gt; Common Turkic &ast;_-z_)



1 nominal derivation suffix

- &ast;_-cI_ ‘actor noun’



1 verbalizer prefix

- &ast;_-lA-_ ‘denominal verbalization’, e.g. &ast;_ger.le-_ ‘to marry’ (from &ast;_ger_ ‘house’)

