# Spanish affixes in Nahuatl


Information and examples are from [Hill and Hill ](sources.bib?label=Hill+and+Hill+#cldf:hill1986a)([1986](sources.bib?label=1986#cldf:hill1986a):194, 197). See [Gardani ](sources.bib?label=Gardani+#cldf:gardani2021a)([2021](sources.bib?label=2021#cldf:gardani2021a)) for a detailed treatment of the agentivizer.


2 diminutive/augmentative markers

- _-ita_ ‘diminutive’, e.g. _nān-ita_ (mother-diminutive) ‘mother dear’, this is the only hybrid formation attested; in general, a native strategy for diminutives is employed on native roots, while _-ita_ is employed for Spanish roots. [González Casanova ](sources.bib?label=Gonz%C3%A1lez+Casanova+#cldf:casanova1933a)([1933](sources.bib?label=1933#cldf:casanova1933a):715) mentions an example with reduplicated stem that seems to be a hybrid formation _xa~xal-to_ (translation unknown).
- _-ote_ ‘augmentative’, e.g. _huēy-ote_ (big-augmentative) ‘enormous’, this is the only hybrid formation attested.



1 agent noun derivation

- -_tero_ (_-ero_) ‘agent noun’, e.g. _cuah-tero_ (wood-agent) ‘wood cutter’, _tlahchiqu-ero_ (collect_maguey-agent) ‘one who collects maguey’. _tepalcat-ero_ (pottery-agent) ‘potter’, _tecol-ero_ (charcoal-agent) ‘coalman’, _tlacual-ero_ (food-agent) ‘waiter who brings lunch to the field workers’ ([González Casanova 1933](sources.bib?label=Gonz%C3%A1lez+Casanova+1933#cldf:casanova1933a):715).


Other Nahuatl languages and varieties appear to have borrowed similar sets of suffixes. In Balsas Nahuatl plural _-s_ and agent marker _-ero_ are borrowed ([Chamoreau 2012](sources.bib?label=Chamoreau+2012#cldf:chamoreau2012a):72). [Suárez ](sources.bib?label=Su%C3%A1rez+#cldf:su1977a)([1977](sources.bib?label=1977#cldf:su1977a):118) mentions “sporadically” borrowed plural suffixes _-s_ / _-es_, but gives no examples. Mexicanero has borrowed diminutive _-ito_ (masculine in Spanish), e.g. _nin-nakas-ito_ (3.plural-ear-diminutive) ‘your little ear’, _tepitʃi-tʃih-ito-h_ (little-plural-diminutive-plural) ‘little’ ([Chamoreau 2012](sources.bib?label=Chamoreau+2012#cldf:chamoreau2012a):83). Papajan Nahuatl has also borrowed _-tero_ ‘agentive’, where it is explicitly argued that borrowing was indirect ([Gutiérrez-Morales 2012](sources.bib?label=Guti%C3%A9rrez-Morales+2012#cldf:morales2012a):224–225).
