# Central Asian Turkic affixes in Russian


Information is taken from [Matushansky ](sources.bib?label=Matushansky+#cldf:matushansky2023a)([2023](sources.bib?label=2023#cldf:matushansky2023a):4), quoting [Witkowski ](sources.bib?label=Witkowski+#cldf:witkowski1981a)([1981](sources.bib?label=1981#cldf:witkowski1981a)), and [Hadzhieva et al. ](sources.bib?label=Hadzhieva+et+al.+#cldf:hadzhieva2012a)([2012](sources.bib?label=2012#cldf:hadzhieva2012a)). The borrowed suffix _-ščik_ originated from the fusion of an adjectival ending -_čij_, which appeared extensively in Turkic noun agent borrowings, and a native nominalizer _-ik_. Eventually, -_ščik_ became productive, replacing _-čij_. An alternative native etymology, which is widely accepted in traditional historical morphology of Russian, analyzes the affix as a fusion of the native adjectival affix _-sk_ and the native nominalizer _-ik_. This is also how the form -_ščik_ can be analyzed synchronically ([Itkin 2007](sources.bib?label=Itkin+2007#cldf:itkin2007a):2). Note that the form _-čik_ is an allomorph of _-ščik_ and _-ščic_ is a feminine equivalent of _-ščik_ ([Matushansky 2023](sources.bib?label=Matushansky+2023#cldf:matushansky2023a)). We tentatively identify here proto Kipchak as a source language, the common ancestor of many central Asian Turkic languages, like Tatar. This agent noun suffix is frequently borrowed from Turkic languages across languages in Eurasia, including the AfBo language pairs Uzbek to Northern Tajik, Turkish to Iraqi Arabic, Turkic to Middle Mongolic, Azeri to Udi, and Turkish to Albanian. [Hadzhieva et al. ](sources.bib?label=Hadzhieva+et+al.+#cldf:hadzhieva2012a)([2012](sources.bib?label=2012#cldf:hadzhieva2012a)) also discuss the borrowing of _-čij_ into Old Church Slavonic.


1 agent noun derivation

- _-ščik_ ‘agent noun’, e.g. _časov-ščik_ (watch.adjective-agent) ‘watchmaker’, _postav-ščik_ (supply-agent) ‘supplier’, _kamenʲ-ščik_ (stone-agent) ‘bricklayer, mason’.

