# Azeri affixes in Udi


Information and examples are from [Maisak ](sources.bib?label=Maisak+#cldf:maisak2019a)([2019](sources.bib?label=2019#cldf:maisak2019a):339) and [Maisak ](sources.bib?label=Maisak+#cldf:maisak2023a)([2023](sources.bib?label=2023#cldf:maisak2023a):66). The Udi people have been using Azeri as a second language for centuries, and in the village of Nizh (Azerbaijan), where the majority of Udi speakers live, Udi speakers are nowadays functionally bilingual in Azeri ([Schulze 2016](sources.bib?label=Schulze+2016#cldf:schulze2016a)). Udi displays strong contact-induced changes from Azeri on all linguistic levels.


1 conditional clitic

- _=sa_ ‘conditional’, e.g. _bak-e=ne=sa_ (become-perfect=3.singular=conditional) ‘if s/he was’. The clitic _=sa_ is also used on verbs and nouns to mark the standard of comparison and it combines with the third person clitic into _=ne=sa_ which is described as an indefinite pronoun, e.g. _šu=ne=sa_ (who=3.singular=conditional) ‘someone’ ([Maisak 2019](sources.bib?label=Maisak+2019#cldf:maisak2019a):340).



1 ordinal numeral formation

- _-(i)mǯi_ ‘ordinal numeral’, e.g. _sa-mǯi_ ‘first’, _χib-imǯi_ (three-ordinal) ‘third’.



1 privative adjectivizer

- _-suz_ ‘privative’, e.g. _χe-suz_ (water-privative) ‘not having water’, _išqːar-suz_ (husband-privative) ‘not having a husband’. This suffix is in competition with the native Udi privative/negative morpheme _nutː_.



3 nominal/nominalizer suffixes

- _-lu_ ‘related to X’, e.g. _niˁžˁ-lu_ (Nizh-attributive) ‘inhabitant of Nizh (village)’.
- _-luʁ_ ‘abstract or status noun’, e.g. _muˁq-luʁ_ (glad-nominalizer) ‘joy’. This suffix is highly productive ([Schulze 2002](sources.bib?label=Schulze+2002#cldf:schulze2002a):122).
- _-či_ ‘agent noun’, e.g. _zido-či_ (iron-agent) ‘smith’. It is rare with native words in the written sources, but in spoken Udi, hybrid formations with this suffix can incidentally be heard ([Schulze 2002](sources.bib?label=Schulze+2002#cldf:schulze2002a):123). These are often certain calques modelled after Azeri lexemes.

