# Spanish affixes in Tagalog


Information and examples are mainly from [Baklanova and Bellamy ](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+and+Bellamy+#cldf:baklanova2023a)([2023](sources.bib?label=2023#cldf:baklanova2023a)), with additions from [Baklanova ](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+#cldf:baklanova2016a)([2016](sources.bib?label=2016#cldf:baklanova2016a); [2017](sources.bib?label=2017#cldf:baklanova2017a)), and [Wolff ](sources.bib?label=Wolff+#cldf:wolff2001a)([2001](sources.bib?label=2001#cldf:wolff2001a)). Examples are spelled in accordance with the phonetic transcription in [Baklanova and Bellamy ](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+and+Bellamy+#cldf:baklanova2023a)([2023](sources.bib?label=2023#cldf:baklanova2023a)). Tagalog has borrowed multiple affixes from Spanish, some of which have overlapping functions. Vowel alternations in many of these specify the gender of the referent, with -_o_ for masculine gender and -_a_ for feminine. Native Tagalog affixes, on the other hand, do not usually mark gender. [Baklanova ](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+#cldf:baklanova2017a)([2017](sources.bib?label=2017#cldf:baklanova2017a)) therefore claims that Tagalog has developed ‘marginal gender’ as a result of borrowing these affixes from Spanish.


2 adjectivizing suffixes. They appear to form both adjectives and nouns ([Baklanova 2017](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+2017#cldf:baklanova2017a):342, [Baklanova and Bellamy 2023](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+and+Bellamy+2023#cldf:baklanova2023a):333).

- -_ado/a_, ‘adjectivizer/nominalizer’, e.g. _palinghado_ (_paling_ ‘awry, to veer, slew’) ‘crooked, twisted; low in quality; contradiction, confusion’. [Baklanova ](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+#cldf:baklanova2017a)([2017](sources.bib?label=2017#cldf:baklanova2017a):342) characterizes this form as an ‘agentive suffix’.
- -_ete_, ‘adjectivizer/nominalizer’, only one pair of hybrid formations appears to be currently in use: _kaliwéte_ (_kaliwáʔ_ ‘left’) ‘left-handed; leftist’; _kananéte_ (_kánan_ ‘right (side)’) ‘right-handed’, formed by analogy from a non-native, non-Spanish stem, _kanan_ ‘right (side)’, which is originally from Malay.



1 nominalizer suffix

- -_o/a_, ‘noun from adjective’, e.g. _lasenggo/a_ (_lasing_ ‘drunk’) ‘drunkard, m/f’ ([Baklanova 2016](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+2016#cldf:baklanova2016a):30). This is the only example of a hybrid formation that was found in the consulted literature.



2 agentive nominalization suffixes

- -_ero/a_, ‘agent of a verb, occupation, or a person with a certain characteristic’, e.g. _ansikutero_ (_ansikót_ ‘loitering, truancy’) ‘loiterer, truant’ ([Baklanova and Bellamy 2023](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+and+Bellamy+2023#cldf:baklanova2023a):339), _babaero_ (_babae_ ‘woman’) ‘philanderer’ ([Baklanova and Bellamy 2023](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+and+Bellamy+2023#cldf:baklanova2023a):339), _bangkéro_ (_bangkáʔ_ ‘boat’) ‘boatman’ ([Wolff 2001](sources.bib?label=Wolff+2001#cldf:wolff2001a):241), _bungangéro/a_ (_bunganga_ ‘gullet of animals/fish; mouth’) ‘chatterbox, m/f’ ([Baklanova and Bellamy 2023](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+and+Bellamy+2023#cldf:baklanova2023a):339), _kaing(in)éro_ (_kaingín_ ‘burning off in field for cultivation; cleared land in a forest’) ‘one who clears land for farming’ ([Baklanova and Bellamy 2023](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+and+Bellamy+2023#cldf:baklanova2023a):339), _kaskaséro/a_ (_kaskás_ ‘sudden effort; spurt; rush’) ‘speed maniac, m/f ‘ ([Baklanova and Bellamy 2023](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+and+Bellamy+2023#cldf:baklanova2023a):339), _sipéro_ (_sipáʔ_ ‘kick with the boot; game with rattan ball’) ‘sipa player’ ([Baklanova and Bellamy 2023](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+and+Bellamy+2023#cldf:baklanova2023a):318). _baságuléro_ (_baságúlo_ ‘altercation; scuffle’) ‘squabbler’ ([Baklanova and Bellamy 2023](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+and+Bellamy+2023#cldf:baklanova2023a):318), _daldalero/a_ (_daldál_ ‘gossiping; jabber; talkative’) ‘gabbler; gossiper; chatterbox, m/f’ ([Baklanova and Bellamy 2023](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+and+Bellamy+2023#cldf:baklanova2023a):340), _hambugéro_ (_hambóg_ ‘boastful, arrogant’) ‘boaster, braggart’ ([Baklanova and Bellamy 2023](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+and+Bellamy+2023#cldf:baklanova2023a):340), _Katipunéro/a_ (_Katipunán_ ‘a revolutionary society’) ‘Katipunan revolutionary’ ([Baklanova and Bellamy 2023](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+and+Bellamy+2023#cldf:baklanova2023a):340). There are also some hybrid formations with non-native, non-Spanish stems: _balitero_ (_balítaʔ_ ‘news’ [originally from Malay]) ‘reporter’ ([Baklanova and Bellamy 2023](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+and+Bellamy+2023#cldf:baklanova2023a):339), _butangéro_ (_butang_ ‘act of beating or hitting a person mercilessly (like a thug)’ [originally from Cebuano]) ‘goon’ ([Wolff 2001](sources.bib?label=Wolff+2001#cldf:wolff2001a):241).
- -_ista_, ‘person with a certain propensity/trait, generally having more neutral connotations than -_ero/a_’ ([Baklanova and Bellamy 2023](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+and+Bellamy+2023#cldf:baklanova2023a):321, 327), e.g. _wangwangísta_ (_wangwáng_ ‘1. completely exposed; 2. special car signal to give a priority pass’) ‘one who uses special car signal to demonstrate authority’ ([Baklanova and Bellamy 2023](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+and+Bellamy+2023#cldf:baklanova2023a):324). The affix is also used to form nouns denoting a follower of a tendency/movement/party’, e.g. _balagtasísta_ ‘follower of poet Balagtas’ ([Baklanova and Bellamy 2023](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+and+Bellamy+2023#cldf:baklanova2023a):323), and in hybrid formations with a non-native, non-Spanish stem, e.g. _aghamísta_ (Tagalog _aghám_ ‘science’ &lt; Sanskrit _āgama_ ‘religion; sacred science’) ‘scientist’ ([Baklanova and Bellamy 2023](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+and+Bellamy+2023#cldf:baklanova2023a):323). It is also used to form nouns denoting a person of a certain profession and relational adjectives corresponding to professional nouns, but no hybrid examples are found in the literature.



2 diminutive suffixes

- -_ito_/_a_, ‘diminutive noun’, e.g. _dalagíta_ (_dalága_ ‘young unmarried lady’) ‘preadolescent girl’ ([Wolff 2001](sources.bib?label=Wolff+2001#cldf:wolff2001a):241, [Baklanova and Bellamy 2023](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+and+Bellamy+2023#cldf:baklanova2023a):330), _bagito_ (_bago_ ‘new’) ‘amateur (adj.), newbie/inexperienced person (n.)’ (https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Category:Tagalog_terms_by_suffix [accessed: 02.04.2024]), _baklita/o_ (_bakláʔ_ ‘homosexual person’) ‘gay, lesbian, sissy’ ([Baklanova 2016](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+2016#cldf:baklanova2016a):30).
- -_ilyo_/_a_, ‘diminutive noun’, e.g. _binatílyo_ (_binátaʔ_ ‘bachelor, young teenage boy’) ‘young preadolescent boy’ ([Wolff 2001](sources.bib?label=Wolff+2001#cldf:wolff2001a):241, [Baklanova and Bellamy 2023](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+and+Bellamy+2023#cldf:baklanova2023a):330).



1 adjectivizer prefix

- _de_-, ‘adjective or gerund associated with a certain noun or verb’, e.g. _desakbát_ (_sakbát_ ‘sling, put over a shoulder’) ‘slinging over a shoulder’, _dekahoy_ (_kahoy_ ‘wood’) ‘wooden’, _depadyák_ (_padyák_ ‘to stamp on, trample’) ‘stamping, trampling’ (e.g. _machina depadyák_ ‘sewing machine with a pedal’, example provided by M. Futagami), _desusì_ (_susì_ ‘key’ [originally from Hokkien]) ‘with lock, something opened with a key’ (e.g. _desusing kahon_ ‘a box with lock’), _desalamín_ (_salamín_ ‘glass, mirror, spectacles, crystal’ [originally from Malay]) ‘wearing spectacles’ ([Rachkov 2012](sources.bib?label=Rachkov+2012#cldf:rachkov2012a):363, [Baklanova 2017](sources.bib?label=Baklanova+2017#cldf:baklanova2017a):343).

