# Coos affixes in Alsea


[Mithun ](sources.bib?label=Mithun+#cldf:mithun2000a)([2000](sources.bib?label=2000#cldf:mithun2000a)) argues that the ergative case marker _q_- was borrowed from the Coosan languages bu Alsea, from where ist was subsequently also borrowed in Siuslaw. All three were small language families native to the Oregon coast that are now extinct. Mithun’s data comes almost entirely from work by [Frachtenberg ](sources.bib?label=Frachtenberg+#cldf:frachtenberg1913a)([1913](sources.bib?label=1913#cldf:frachtenberg1913a); [1914](sources.bib?label=1914#cldf:frachtenberg1914a); [1917](sources.bib?label=1917#cldf:frachtenberg1917a); [1918](sources.bib?label=1918#cldf:frachtenberg1918a); [1920](sources.bib?label=1920#cldf:frachtenberg1920a); [1922a](sources.bib?label=1922a#cldf:frachtenberg1922a); [1922b](sources.bib?label=1922b#cldf:frachtenberg1922b)) and [Jacobs ](sources.bib?label=Jacobs+#cldf:jacobs1939a)([1939](sources.bib?label=1939#cldf:jacobs1939a); [1940](sources.bib?label=1940#cldf:jacobs1940a)). Each of these language families started out marking ergative case in different ways, Coos with the prefix _q_-, Alsea with the prefix _x̣_-, and Siuslaw with ablaut. In Mithun’s analysis, Alsea subsequently borrowed the Coosan ergative prefix _q_-, which was reported to freely alternate with the native Alsean ergative prefix _x̣_- on native Alsean stems ([Frachtenberg 1918](sources.bib?label=Frachtenberg+1918#cldf:frachtenberg1918a):21). Siuslaw later borrowed the Coosan ergative prefix _q_- from Alsea, which in Siuslaw is only found on kinship nouns and first and second-person pronouns that may themselves be loanwords from Alsea. Non-borrowed nouns and pronouns are marked for ergative using the native ablaut strategy.


1 case prefix

- _q-_, ‘ergative marker’, hybrid formations are claimed by [Mithun ](sources.bib?label=Mithun+#cldf:mithun2000a)([2000](sources.bib?label=2000#cldf:mithun2000a)) to be present but no examples are provided. Examples of _q_- used in Alsea from [Frachtenberg ](sources.bib?label=Frachtenberg+#cldf:frachtenberg1918a)([1918](sources.bib?label=1918#cldf:frachtenberg1918a)) include _q-as_ ergative-article which alternates with _x̣-as_ ergative-article, and _qa-tas_ ergative-proximate, with the caveat that the roots cannot be conclusively shown to be native to Alsea ([Frachtenberg 1918](sources.bib?label=Frachtenberg+1918#cldf:frachtenberg1918a):62–65).

