# Middle Chinese affixes in Vietnamese


Information on affixes and word etymologies is mostly derived from Wiktionary, supplemented by examples gathered informally via internet searches and verified via personal communications between T. Lê Thị, B. H. Nguyễn, V. A. Nguyễn and T. T. Chan in 2024. Being an isolating language, it is unclear what an affix is in Vietnamese. In the current entry, affixes are understood to be morphemes that either cannot be used on their own (i.e. bound morphemes) or if they can be, their meaning changes when used on their own. A secondary consideration is that prefixes with a predicative meaning (e.g. _cựu_ ‘former, old’, _cùng/đồng_ ‘co-, same’) are not seen as adjectives since they precede the noun they modify. This is unlike regular adjectives in Vietnamese, which follow their head noun. Finally, many of the forms discussed here are recognized as affixes in modern Chinese ([Arcodia 2012](sources.bib?label=Arcodia+2012#cldf:arcodia2012a):97–98).

The forms covered in the current entry were most probably borrowed when Vietnamese was undergoing intensive contact with ‘Annamese Middle Chinese’, a regional variety of Middle Chinese hypothesized by [Phan ](sources.bib?label=Phan+#cldf:phan2013a)([2013](sources.bib?label=2013#cldf:phan2013a):296–302) to have existed in northern Vietnam under the Tang dynasty prior to the 10th century CE. We therefore consider this the primary borrowing event. The morphemes most likely only came to be used as affixes much later, in the 19th and 20th centuries, under the influence of Chinese character-based compounds. These were first coined in Japanese and then borrowed into Vietnamese and other East Asian languages, including Sinitic languages in a process called ‘Sinographic borrowings’ ([Lê 2002](sources.bib?label=L%C3%AA+2002#cldf:l2002a):30, cited in [Phan 2013](sources.bib?label=Phan+2013#cldf:phan2013a):343–352).


1 ordinal numeral (dates of month) prefix

- _mồng_, ‘forms dates from the ten native cardinal numerals (_một, hai, ba, bốn, năm, sáu, bảy, tám, chín, mười_) in Northern Vietnamese, referring to the first ten days of a month’, e.g. _mồng một_ ‘the first day of the month’, _mồng hai_ ‘the second day of the month’ (https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/m%E1%BB%93ng#Vietnamese [accessed: 18.06.2024]).



6 adjectivizing prefixes for nominal modification

- _hậu_, ‘post-’, e.g. _hậu đổi mới_ (_Đổi Mới_ ‘period of market reforms in Vietnam, 1975–1985’) ‘post-Doi Moi’, _hậu nhà Nguyễn_ (_nhà Nguyễn_ ‘the Nguyen dynasty’) ‘post-Nguyen dynasty’ (https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/h%E1%BA%ADu [accessed: 18.06.2024]).
- _kháng_, ‘anti-’, e.g. _kháng nghiện_ (_nghiện_ ‘addiction’) ‘addiction relief (medication), lit. anti-addiction’, _kháng rượu_ (_rượu_ ‘alcohol’) ‘(medication) providing relief from an alcohol addiction, lit. anti-alcohol’, _(năng lực) kháng buồn nôn_ (_buồn nôn_ ‘nauseous’) ‘anti-nausea (i.e. has the effect of combatting nausea)’. This morpheme behaves like a derivational prefix but can be used as a verb in very similar constructions, e.g. _tôi kháng nghiện_ (‘I resist an addiction’) (https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/kh%C3%A1ng#Vietnamese [accessed: 18.06.2024]).
- _ngoài_, ‘extra-’ adjective formed from noun with the meaning external to that noun, extra-’, e.g. _ngoài trái đất_ (_trái đất_ ‘planet Earth’) ‘extraterrestrial’, _ngoài nước_ (_nước_ ‘water, country’) ‘overseas’, _ngoài hệ mặt trời_ (_hệ mặt trời_ ‘solar system’, _hệ_ ‘system’ is a Chinese borrowing, while _mặt trời_ ‘solar’ is native) ‘external to the solar system’ (https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ngo%C3%A0i [accessed: 18.06.2024]).
- _phản_, ‘anti-’, e.g. _phản xét lại_ (_xét lại_ ‘to review, reconsider’) ‘anti-revisionist’, _phản bóng đá_ (_bóng đá_ ‘football’) ‘anti-football’, _phản máy móc_ (_máy móc_ ‘machinery’) ‘anti-mechanical’ (https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ph%E1%BA%A3n [accessed: 18.06.2024]).
- _phòng,_ ‘anti-, protecting against, forms adjectives from nouns’, e.g. _phòng trộm_ (_trộm_ ‘theft’) ‘anti-theft’, _phòng thuốc trừ sâu_ (_thuốc trừ sâu_ ‘pesticide’) ‘protecting against pesticides’. This morpheme could potentially also be used as a free-standing verb (https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ph%C3%B2ng [accessed: 18.06.2024]).
- _tiền_, ‘pre-’, e.g. _tiền đổi mới_ (_Đổi Mới_ ‘period of market reforms in Vietnam, 1975–1985’) ‘pre-Doi Moi’, _tiền nhà Nguyễn_ (_nhà Nguyễn_ ‘the Nguyen dynasty’) ‘pre-Nguyen dynasty’ (https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ti%E1%BB%81n [accessed: 18.06.2024]).



6 nominal derivation prefixes

- _chủ nghĩa_, ‘-ism, forms abstract nouns referring to an ideology from verbs or nouns’, e.g. _chủ nghĩa xét lại_ (_xét lại_ ‘to review, reconsider’, where _xét_ is derived from Chinese but _lại_ is native) ‘revisionism’, _chủ nghĩa yêu nước_ (_yêu nước_ ‘patriot, patriotic, patriotism’) ‘patriotism’ (https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ch%E1%BB%A7_ngh%C4%A9a [accessed: 18.06.2024]).
- _cùng_, ‘metonymic noun from noun, denoting referent sharing the noun, co-’, e.g. _(bạn) cùng lớp_ (_lớp_ ‘school year’) ‘classmate, lit. friend from the same class’, _cùng căn hộ_ (_căn hộ_ ‘flat’) ‘flatmate, lit. co-flat’ (https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/c%C3%B9ng [accessed: 18.06.2024]).
- _cựu_, ‘former, forms modified nouns from nouns’, e.g. _cựu nhà báo_ (_nhà báo_ ‘journalist’, _báo_ is a loan from Chinese but _nhà_ is native) ‘former journalist’, _cựu nhà ngoại giao_ (_nhà ngoại giao_ ‘diplomat’, _ngoại giao_ is a Chinese loan) ‘former diplomat’, _cựu nhà tù_ (_nhà tù_ ‘jail’, _tù_ is a Chinese loan) ‘former prison’, _cựu người yêu_ (_người yêu_ ‘romantic partner’) ‘former romantic partner’, _cựu chồng_ (_chồng_ ‘husband’) ‘ex-husband’, _cựu sân bay_ (_sân bay_ ‘airport’) ‘former airport’ (https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/c%E1%BB%B1u#Vietnamese [accessed: 18.06.2024]).
- _đồng_, ‘metonymic noun from noun, denoting referent sharing the noun, co-’, e.g. _đồng lòng_ (_lòng_ ‘heart’) ‘unanimous, lit. of the same heart’, _đồng bọn_ (_bọn_ ‘gang’) ‘accomplice, teammate, lit. co-gang’ (https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/%C4%91%E1%BB%93ng#Vietnamese [accessed: 18.06.2024]).
- _siêu_, ‘super-, forms modified nouns from nouns’, e.g. _siêu sao_ (_sao_ ‘star’) ‘superstar’, _siêu máy tính_ (_máy tính_ ‘computer’) ‘supercomputer’ (https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/si%C3%AAu#Vietnamese [accessed: 18.06.2024]).
- _trường_ ‘field or range’, e.g. _trường bắn_ (_bắn_ ‘to shoot’) ‘shooting range’, _trường lái_ (_lái_ ‘to drive’) ‘a range for motorcycle-riding or driving practice’, _trường nhìn_ (_nhìn_ ‘to look at’) ‘a field of view’ (https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/tr%C6%B0%E1%BB%9Dng [accessed: 18.06.2024]).



1 agent nominalizer prefix/suffix

- _trưởng_, ‘prefix or suffix indicating a leader, elder of the modified noun’, e.g. _lớp trưởng_ (_lớp_ ‘school year’) ‘chief student supervisor of the class’, _trưởng nhóm_ (_nhóm_ ‘group’) ‘a band leader, a frontman’ (https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/tr%C6%B0%E1%BB%9Fng#Vietnamese [accessed: 18.06.2024]).



1 verbalizing suffix

- _hoá_, ‘-ize, -ization’ derives verb or verbs that can also be used as nouns from noun indicating transition to a state defined by the modified noun’, e.g. _máy tính hoá_ (_máy tính_ ‘computer’) ‘computerization’, _máy móc hoá_ (_máy móc_ ‘machinery’) ‘mechanization, motorization’, _mũi hoá_ (_mũi_ ‘nose’) ‘to nasalize’ (https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ho%C3%A1 [accessed: 18.06.2024]).

