# Sahaptin affixes in Upper Chinook


Information and examples are from [Sapir ](sources.bib?label=Sapir+#cldf:sapir1907a)([1907](sources.bib?label=1907#cldf:sapir1907a):541–542). He characterizes these forms as “loosely tagged on postposi­tions, in some cases optionally prepositions”, but also calls them “suffixed or prefixed”. [Silverstein ](sources.bib?label=Silverstein+#cldf:silverstein1974a)([1974](sources.bib?label=1974#cldf:silverstein1974a):S98) calls these forms “enclitics on noun phrases for adverbial “case” relations” and notes that “from the Chinookan structural perspective, these are superfluous to the system, which incorporates dativoid relations into the verb prefix”. [Campbell ](sources.bib?label=Campbell+#cldf:campbell1997a)([1997](sources.bib?label=1997#cldf:campbell1997a)) calls these forms “case endings” and “derivational suffix”. See also [Kinkade et al. ](sources.bib?label=Kinkade+et+al.+#cldf:kinkade1998a)([1998](sources.bib?label=1998#cldf:kinkade1998a)).


4 peripheral case suffixes

- _-ba_ ‘in, at’, e.g. _wimałba_ ‘in the river’, _dáuyaba wílX_ ‘in this country’ (lit. this-in country’), _gatcig̣ ÉkElba_ ‘where he saw him’ (from _gatcig̣ ÉkEl_ ‘he saw him’)
- _-iamt_ ‘towards, from’, e.g. _wima____ꞁ____iámt_ ‘to or from the river’, _imig̣áł naikáyamt_ ‘you are bigger than I’ (lit. your bigness [is] me-from, compared with me’); _átpXiamd agáłax_ ‘to where she goes out towards [us] (_atpX_ ‘she goes out towards’), the sun’, i.e. ‘east’
- _-báma_ ‘for’, e.g. _cán bama_ ‘for whom?’, _Múlmul bama_ ‘from, belonging to Fort Simcoe’. This form can be suffixed or prefixed
- _-ÉnEgi_ ‘with’, e.g. _aq!ē’wiqxi ngi_ with a knife’. This element is described as “post-or pre-position”.



1 adjectivizers

- _ámEni_ ‘made out of’, e.g. _igábEnac amEni ‘_made out of young oak’. This element is described as “post-or pre-position”.



1 verb subordination suffix

- -_bÉt_, ‘when’, e.g. _gayúyabEt_ ‘when he went ‘; _nk!áckacbEt_ ‘when I was a child.’ In lengthened form, _bä’t_ means ‘as soon as’, e.g. _gayuyabä’t_ ‘as soon as he went.’

