# Turkish affixes in Albanian


Information and examples are mostly from [Boretzky ](sources.bib?label=Boretzky+#cldf:boretzky1975a)([1975a](sources.bib?label=1975a#cldf:boretzky1975a):265–270), some additional examples stem from [Xhuvani and Çabej ](sources.bib?label=Xhuvani+and+%C3%87abej+#cldf:xhuvani1962a)([1962](sources.bib?label=1962#cldf:xhuvani1962a)). Information on the etymologies of stems comes from [Orel ](sources.bib?label=Orel+#cldf:orel1998a)([1998](sources.bib?label=1998#cldf:orel1998a)). According to [Boretzky ](sources.bib?label=Boretzky+#cldf:boretzky1975a)([1975a](sources.bib?label=1975a#cldf:boretzky1975a):265), there are many Turkish suffixes in Albanian, but only 34 are used to derive more than a few Albanian stems. [Boretzky ](sources.bib?label=Boretzky+#cldf:boretzky1975a)([1975a](sources.bib?label=1975a#cldf:boretzky1975a):265–270) nevertheless lists 5 borrowed suffixes and gives examples of combinations with native stems for each. Some of them may be restricted to spoken varieties.


4 nominalizers

- _-xhi/çi_ ‘profession derivation’, e.g. _derraxhi_ ‘swineherd’ (from _derre_ ‘pig’), _djathëxhi_ ‘cheese maker’ (from _djathë_ ‘cheese’), _lëkuraxhi_ ‘skinner’ (from _lëkurë_ ‘skin’). [Boretzky ](sources.bib?label=Boretzky+#cldf:boretzky1975a)([1975a](sources.bib?label=1975a#cldf:boretzky1975a):265–270) found about 40 derivations with this suffix, but expects that there are many more. Brian Joseph (personal communication, July 2011) confirms that this suffix is productively used. It also appears in [Genesin and Matzinger ](sources.bib?label=Genesin+and+Matzinger+#cldf:genesin2016a)([2016](sources.bib?label=2016#cldf:genesin2016a):3127). This agent noun suffix is frequently borrowed from Turkic across languages in Eurasia as discussed in the AfBo entries on Uzbek affixes in Northern Tajik, Turkish affixes in Iraqi Arabic, Turkic affixes in Middle Mongolic, Azeri affixes in Udi, and Central Asian Turkic affixes in Russian. More examples are given by [Hadzhieva et al. ](sources.bib?label=Hadzhieva+et+al.+#cldf:hadzhieva2012a)([2012](sources.bib?label=2012#cldf:hadzhieva2012a)), including _-džija_, borrowed from Turkish into Bulgarian. This form is now productively used in Bulgarian (https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/-джия#Bulgarian ［accessed: 10.07.2024］).
- _-llëk_ ‘abstract noun nominalizer (from adverbs, and others)’, e.g. _zjarrlëk_ ‘burning heat’ (from _zjarr_ ‘fire’). According to Brian Joseph (personal communication July 2011) this suffix is not very productive.
- _-li/-lli_ ‘designation of residents’, e.g. _vendali_ ‘inhabitant’ (from _vend_ ‘place’), _Elbasanlli_ ‘inhabitant of Elbasan’, _Tiranalli_ ‘inhabitant of Tirana’.
- _-qar_ ‘nouns denoting a person having a quality that is denoted by the noun or verb from which it is derived’, e.g. _nihmaçar_ ‘helper’ (from _ndihmë_ ‘help’), _mundqar_ ‘someone who earns his daily bread with effort’ (from _mund_ ‘effort’).



1 adjectivizer

- _-çe_ ‘ethnic or regional terms, and other derivations’, e.g. _Shqipëtarçe_ ‘Albanian (adj.)’ (from _Shqipëtar_ ‘Albanian (person)’), _vendçe_ ‘locally’ (from _vend_ ‘place’), _derrçe_ ‘pig-like’ (from _derr_ ‘pig’). Brian Joseph (personal communication, July 2011) confirms that this suffix is productive.



1 plural marker

- _-lar ~ -llar ~ -lerë_ ‘masculine human plural’, e.g. _mbretlerë_ ‘emperor’ (from _mbret_, originally from Latin), _priʃtlerë_ ‘priests’ (from _priʃt_, originally from Latin), _giyshllar_ ‘grandfathers’ (from _giyish_, from Proto Albanian). Examples are from [Gardani ](sources.bib?label=Gardani+#cldf:gardani2008a)([2008](sources.bib?label=2008#cldf:gardani2008a):72), who cites [Fiedler ](sources.bib?label=Fiedler+#cldf:fiedler1977a)([1977](sources.bib?label=1977#cldf:fiedler1977a)). This form is used only on a few words, probably most of them of Turkish origin, according to Brian Joseph (personal communication, July 2011).

