# Kurdish affixes in Sonqor Turkic


Information and examples are from [Bulut ](sources.bib?label=Bulut+#cldf:bulut2005a)([2005](sources.bib?label=2005#cldf:bulut2005a); [2007](sources.bib?label=2007#cldf:bulut2007a); [2014](sources.bib?label=2014#cldf:bulut2014a)), which is partially based on material presented by [Buluç ](sources.bib?label=Bulu%C3%A7+#cldf:bulu1975a)([1975](sources.bib?label=1975#cldf:bulu1975a)). The borrowed affixes are attested in various Turkic varieties belonging to the South Oghuz dialect group spoken in Iran and Iraq.


2 object pronoun enclitics. Only the borrowed second singular and the third plural enclitics are attested in corpora, although it is very likely that other object pronoun enclitics (with different person and number values) are also borrowed (Christiane Bulut, personal communication 2012).

- _-it_ ‘second singular’, e.g. _almæ âllæm-it_ (apple/buy.aorist.1sg-2sg.dative) ‘I will buy you an apple’ ([Buluç 1975](sources.bib?label=Bulu%C3%A7+1975#cldf:bulu1975a):183; [Bulut 2007](sources.bib?label=Bulut+2007#cldf:bulut2007a):174)
- _-şan_ ‘third plural’, e.g. _yæyipt-şan_ (eat.perfect.3sg-3pl.accusative) ‘he has eaten them’ ([Buluç 1975](sources.bib?label=Bulu%C3%A7+1975#cldf:bulu1975a):183; [Bulut 2007](sources.bib?label=Bulut+2007#cldf:bulut2007a):174)



3 non-interrelated suffixes

- _-tar_ ‘comparative’, e.g. _çux-dar_ (much/most-comparative) ‘more’ ([Bulut 2005](sources.bib?label=Bulut+2005#cldf:bulut2005a):254), “the copied morpheme +_tar_ displays no combinatorial restrictions; it combines with Turkic and Iranian adjectives alike” ([Bulut 2005](sources.bib?label=Bulut+2005#cldf:bulut2005a):253)
- _-aka_ _~ -eke ~ -ækæ_ ‘definite, specific’ (from Southern Kurdish, Gorani), e.g. _ušaġ-ækæ-le’_ (child-specific-pl) ‘those children’, _mincuġ-ækæ-re_ (bead-specific-ablative) ‘of those pearls’, _šê’r-eke-sin-ne_ (poem-specific-possessor-ablative) ‘about that poem by him’. This suffix “attaches directly to Turkic noun stems and precedes plural, possessive or case suffixes” ([Bulut 2005](sources.bib?label=Bulut+2005#cldf:bulut2005a):254). See also [Kossmann ](sources.bib?label=Kossmann+#cldf:kossmann2011a)([2011](sources.bib?label=2011#cldf:kossmann2011a)), who cites a Sorani source form from [Blau ](sources.bib?label=Blau+#cldf:blau1980a)([1980](sources.bib?label=1980#cldf:blau1980a):46, 63). This form is also borrowed into Southern Iraqi Turkman.
- _-iş_ ‘also, even’, e.g. _yėm__ēduv__iş_ ‘you have not even eaten’, _ġēliş_ ‘come!’, _ōḫiş_ ‘even an eye’ ([Buluç 1975](sources.bib?label=Bulu%C3%A7+1975#cldf:bulu1975a):182). This suffix “is in all probability a copy of the Kurdish enclitic ［...］ which in southern Kurdish may be suffixed to either a nominal or a verbal form” ([Bulut 2007](sources.bib?label=Bulut+2007#cldf:bulut2007a):175).


An additional borrowed suffix, _-i_ ‘indefinite’ from Persian, “with similar function ［as _-aka_］” ([Bulut 2005](sources.bib?label=Bulut+2005#cldf:bulut2005a):254), is “in all instances of our material ［...］ attached to copied noun phrases” ([Bulut 2005](sources.bib?label=Bulut+2005#cldf:bulut2005a):255), i.e. stems that are likewise borrowed from Persian. For this reason, this suffix is not included here, although there is some indirect evidence that “could prove that the copied unit +_i_ is compatible with non-Persian nouns” ([Bulut 2005](sources.bib?label=Bulut+2005#cldf:bulut2005a):255).
