# Croatian affixes in Istro-Romanian


Information and examples are drawn from various sources, as noted below. For additional discussion of some of the following examples, see [Rozencvejg ](sources.bib?label=Rozencvejg+#cldf:rozencvejg1976a)([1976](sources.bib?label=1976#cldf:rozencvejg1976a):24), [Dahmen ](sources.bib?label=Dahmen+#cldf:dahmen1989a)([1989](sources.bib?label=1989#cldf:dahmen1989a):455), [Breu ](sources.bib?label=Breu+#cldf:breu1992a)([1992](sources.bib?label=1992#cldf:breu1992a); [1996](sources.bib?label=1996#cldf:breu1996a):35–36), and [Boretzky ](sources.bib?label=Boretzky+#cldf:boretzky2004a)([2004](sources.bib?label=2004#cldf:boretzky2004a):1648).


2 agreement suffixes, marking agreement with neuter nouns on adjectives. The singular suffix occurs in both varieties of Istro-Romanian (viz. Northern Istro-Romanin and Southern Istro-Romanian), whereas the agreement marker _-a_ only occurs in Northern Istro-Romanian.

- _-o_ marking mass neuter singular agreement, e.g. Southern Istro-Romanian _nov-o_ ‘new-mass.neuter.singular’) (from Latin _novum_) ([Gardani 2020](sources.bib?label=Gardani+2020#cldf:gardani2020a):275; Kovačec 1966:68; [Loporcaro, Gardani and Giudici 2021](sources.bib?label=Loporcaro%2C+Gardani+and+Giudici+2021#cldf:loporcaro2021a):92).
- _-a_ marking collective neuter plural agreement_,_ e.g. Northern Istro-Romanian (_diːtsa_) _bur-a_ ‘(children) good-collective.neuter.plural’ (from Latin _bonum_); it occurs on class one adjectives, articles, personal pronouns and demonstratives ([Loporcaro 2018](sources.bib?label=Loporcaro+2018#cldf:loporcaro2018a):295; [Loporcaro, Gardani and Giudici 2021](sources.bib?label=Loporcaro%2C+Gardani+and+Giudici+2021#cldf:loporcaro2021a):118).



7 derivational prefixes, forming to some extent aspectual pairs. Further prefixes are mentioned in some of the sources, but these are not attested in hybrid formations.

- _po-_ ‘perfective’, e.g. _potorče_ ‘to spin (perfective)’ from _torče_ ‘to spin (imperfective)’ ([Hurren 1969](sources.bib?label=Hurren+1969#cldf:hurren1969a):62; [Kovačec 1971](sources.bib?label=Kova%C4%8Dec+1971#cldf:kova1971a):125), _posúže_ ‘to suck (perfective)’ from _súže_ ‘to suck (imperfective)’ ([Sala 1988](sources.bib?label=Sala+1988#cldf:sala1988a):79).
- _za- ~ ze-_ ‘perfective’_,_ e.g. _zadurmi/zedurmi_ ‘to sleep (perfective)’ from _durmi_ ‘to sleep (imperfective)’, _zaplənče_ ‘to weep (perfective)’ from _plənče_ ‘to weep (imperfective)’ ([Hurren 1969](sources.bib?label=Hurren+1969#cldf:hurren1969a):62; [Kovačec 1971](sources.bib?label=Kova%C4%8Dec+1971#cldf:kova1971a):125), _zalatrɑ̊_ bark (perfective/inchoative) ‘to begin to bark’ from _latrɑ̊_ ‘bark.imperfective’ ([Gardani 2020](sources.bib?label=Gardani+2020#cldf:gardani2020a):276; [Sala 1988](sources.bib?label=Sala+1988#cldf:sala1988a):79).
- _raz-_ ‘perfective’_,_ e.g. _razleg__u__a_ ‘to bind (perfective)’ from _leg__u__a_ ‘to bind (imperfective)’ ([Hurren 1969](sources.bib?label=Hurren+1969#cldf:hurren1969a):62; [Kovačec 1971](sources.bib?label=Kova%C4%8Dec+1971#cldf:kova1971a):125; [Sala 1988](sources.bib?label=Sala+1988#cldf:sala1988a):79).
- _s-_ ‘perfective’, e.g. _skopei_ ‘to dig (perfective)’ from _kopei_ ‘to dig (imperfective)’ ([Hurren 1969](sources.bib?label=Hurren+1969#cldf:hurren1969a):62; [Kovačec 1971](sources.bib?label=Kova%C4%8Dec+1971#cldf:kova1971a):125).
- _od-_ ‘perfective’, e.g. _odlomi_ ‘to break (perfective)’ from _lomi_ ‘to break (imperfective)’ ([Hurren 1969](sources.bib?label=Hurren+1969#cldf:hurren1969a):62; [Kovačec 1971](sources.bib?label=Kova%C4%8Dec+1971#cldf:kova1971a):125).
- _na- ~ ne-_ ‘perfective’, e.g. _namâŋcɑ̊_ ‘to eat (perfective)’ from _mâncɑ̊_ ‘to eat’ ([Sala 1988](sources.bib?label=Sala+1988#cldf:sala1988a):79).
- _pri-_ ‘perfective’, e.g. _prifače_ ‘to finish changing, to do differently’ from _fače_ ‘to do’ ([Sala 1988](sources.bib?label=Sala+1988#cldf:sala1988a):79).


Similar sets of Slavic aktionsart prefixes have been borrowed into other Daco-Romance languages: 9 aktionsart prefixes found in Megleno-Romanian are borrowed from Bulgarian. The prefix _do-_ ‘attainment of the final point of motion or activity’ is found in Romanian varieties spoken in Serbian (Vlach Romanian), e.g. _do-facu_ preverb-do:past.3.singular) ‘s/he finished doing something’. Note that in Vlach Romanian, unlike Serbian (the source language) and Istro-Romanian ([Kovačec 1971](sources.bib?label=Kova%C4%8Dec+1971#cldf:kova1971a):125), the prefix does not have a perfectivizing role. Its meaning is derivational, and the category of Slavic aspect was not introduced with the borrowing ([Gardani, Arkadiev, and Amiridze 2015](sources.bib?label=Gardani%2C+Arkadiev%2C+and+Amiridze+2015#cldf:gardani2015a):7). The borrowing of aspectual/aktionsart preverbs is common in languages that have been in contact with Slavic (see Russian affixes in Lithuanian Romani, and Russian and Belarusian affixes in Lithuanian).

[Gardani ](sources.bib?label=Gardani+#cldf:gardani2008a)([2008](sources.bib?label=2008#cldf:gardani2008a):69; citing [Pușcariu 1943](sources.bib?label=Pu%C8%99cariu+1943#cldf:pu1943a):280) also mentions that the accusative marker _-u_ would have replaced the inherited _-ɑ̌_ in just only fixed phrase involving a native Romance lexical base, viz. _za ţiru_ ‘at dinner‘ (cf. Latin _cēna_).
