# Uzbek affixes in Northern Tajik


Information and examples are from [Doerfer ](sources.bib?label=Doerfer+#cldf:doerfer1967a)([1967](sources.bib?label=1967#cldf:doerfer1967a)), who mainly analyzes data from [Rastorgueva ](sources.bib?label=Rastorgueva+#cldf:rastorgueva1964a)([1964](sources.bib?label=1964#cldf:rastorgueva1964a)), see also [Boretzky ](sources.bib?label=Boretzky+#cldf:boretzky2004a)([2004](sources.bib?label=2004#cldf:boretzky2004a):1651). Information on the etymology of stems was provided by Don Stilo (personal communication 2013).


2 nominalizers

- _-či ‘_agent noun’, e.g. _χizmat-či_ ‘servant’, “productive” according to [Doerfer ](sources.bib?label=Doerfer+#cldf:doerfer1967a)([1967](sources.bib?label=1967#cldf:doerfer1967a):54)
- _-lik_ ‘abstract noun’, e.g. _χoǧa-lik_ ‘farm, estate’



5 case suffixes (out of 6 Northern Tajik case suffixes). Some of the borrowed case markers seem to be used alternatively with native case markers, the genitive/accusative case is the only case for which there is only a native, and no borrowed case marker ([Doerfer 1967](sources.bib?label=Doerfer+1967#cldf:doerfer1967a):62).

- _-ga_ ‘dative’, e.g. _χåna-ga_ ‘to the house’, used alternatively to _χåna-va_, with a native Persian case marker. _-ga_ is maybe only used with Persian verbs and nominalized verbs, but there is a clear tendency that it is on the rise ([Doerfer 1967](sources.bib?label=Doerfer+1967#cldf:doerfer1967a):62).
- _-dan_ ‘ablative’, e.g. _yakom klasašdan_ (first/class-3sg.possessor-ablative) ‘from the first class/grade’ ([Doerfer 1967](sources.bib?label=Doerfer+1967#cldf:doerfer1967a):54)
- _-nda_ ~ _-da_ ‘locative’, e.g. _inǧanda_ ‘here’ ([Doerfer 1967](sources.bib?label=Doerfer+1967#cldf:doerfer1967a):54)
- _-gača_ ‘terminative’, e.g. _tå bist-u-haftom sål-gača_ ‘up to the 26th year’ ([Doerfer 1967](sources.bib?label=Doerfer+1967#cldf:doerfer1967a):54)
- _-dak_ ‘equative/comparative’ ([Doerfer 1967](sources.bib?label=Doerfer+1967#cldf:doerfer1967a):16, 56), no examples given, but described as part of a borrowed paradigm of case markers ([Doerfer 1967](sources.bib?label=Doerfer+1967#cldf:doerfer1967a):62)



2 derivational suffixes combining with numerals

- _-gina_ ‘quantitative limiter’, e.g. _yak som-gina_ ‘one Ruble more [e.g. more expensive, cheaper]’
- _-la_, _-lamiš_ ‘collective numeral formation’, e.g. _duttalamå_ ‘both of us’, _čårtalamiš_ ‘(with) all four’



2 suffixes not related to other borrowed morphology

- _-ča_ ‘adverbializer’, e.g. _urus-ča_ ‘in Russian’
- _-råq_ ‘comparative’, used together with the native Tajik comparative suffix, e.g. _tez-tar-råq_ or _tez-råq-tar_ ‘faster’


[Doerfer ](sources.bib?label=Doerfer+#cldf:doerfer1967a)([1967](sources.bib?label=1967#cldf:doerfer1967a):18, 19, 25, 39, 56) mentions four other cases of morphological borrowing. They are not counted here for the following reasons: First, two of these appear to be free forms, although maybe derived from Turkic affixes: _ikin_ ‘dubitative’ and _či_ ‘emotional particle’. Second, the remaining two markers are explicitly described as combining only with Turkic stems: _inči_ ‘ordinal number formation’ and _miš_ ‘verbal noun formation’.
