# Greek affixes in Arvanitic Albanian


Information and examples are mainly from [Sasse ](sources.bib?label=Sasse+#cldf:sasse1985a)([1985](sources.bib?label=1985#cldf:sasse1985a); [1991](sources.bib?label=1991#cldf:sasse1991a)). According to [Sasse ](sources.bib?label=Sasse+#cldf:sasse1985a)([1985](sources.bib?label=1985#cldf:sasse1985a):91–92), borrowed affixes have become productive and can today be used to form hybrid formations from Albanian stems. Additional information is from [Altimari ](sources.bib?label=Altimari+#cldf:altimari2011a)([2011](sources.bib?label=2011#cldf:altimari2011a)).


4 diminutive markers, out of a total of 7 diminutive markers in Arvanitic Albanian ([Sasse 1991](sources.bib?label=Sasse+1991#cldf:sasse1991a):235–239), which do not seem to be phonologically conditioned allomorphs.

- -(_á)ko_ ‘diminutive’, e.g. _priftáko_ ‘little priest’, limited to a few cases. [Sasse ](sources.bib?label=Sasse+#cldf:sasse1985a)([1985](sources.bib?label=1985#cldf:sasse1985a)) explicitly states that this form is borrowed.
- _-átʃ_ ‘diminutive’, e.g. _kuðátʃ_ ‘little jar’, limited productivity. [Sasse ](sources.bib?label=Sasse+#cldf:sasse1985a)([1985](sources.bib?label=1985#cldf:sasse1985a)) explicitly states that this form is borrowed.
- _-ác_ ‘diminutive (pup)’, e.g. _ʎepurác_ ‘rabbit’s pup’. Its use as a diminutive with nouns other than animals is restricted to Greek stems ([Sasse 1991](sources.bib?label=Sasse+1991#cldf:sasse1991a):240).
- _-ópuł_ ‘diminutive (pup)’, e.g. _uʎkópuł_ ‘wolf’s pup’, has limited productivity ([Sasse 1991](sources.bib?label=Sasse+1991#cldf:sasse1991a):241).



2 noun derivation suffixes, out of a large set of other noun-to-noun derivation markers, e.g. feminine occupation, etc. ([Sasse 1991](sources.bib?label=Sasse+1991#cldf:sasse1991a):241–246).

- -_jár_ ‘agent noun’, e.g. _ʃurrjár_ ‘someone urinating’ (from _ʃúrrə_ ‘urine’). This suffix is largely productive and partially native and partially borrowed from Greek _(ι)άρης_ ([Sasse 1991](sources.bib?label=Sasse+1991#cldf:sasse1991a):242).
- _-jót_ ‘inhabitant of’, e.g. _curkatjót_ ‘inhabitant of Kiurka’ (from _curkát_ ‘Kiurka’). This suffix is productive and [Sasse ](sources.bib?label=Sasse+#cldf:sasse1985a)([1985](sources.bib?label=1985#cldf:sasse1985a)) explicitly mentions that it is borrowed.



4 verbalizers, out of a total of 9 in Arvanitic Albanian. All verbal derivational morphemes are unproductive ([Sasse 1991](sources.bib?label=Sasse+1991#cldf:sasse1991a):252–255).

- _-(j)ás_ ‘verbalizer’, e.g. _morrá_ ‘delouse’ (from _mórr_ ‘louse’). The form is given as _(j)ás_ ([Sasse 1991](sources.bib?label=Sasse+1991#cldf:sasse1991a):254) or _á_ ([Sasse 1985](sources.bib?label=Sasse+1985#cldf:sasse1985a)), but according to Sasse (personal communication, 2012), _as_ is the correct form. [Sasse ](sources.bib?label=Sasse+#cldf:sasse1985a)([1985](sources.bib?label=1985#cldf:sasse1985a)) explicitly mentions that it is borrowed.
- _-ís_ ‘verbalizer’, e.g. _dzarrís_ ‘to harrow’ (from _dzárrə_ ‘harrow’). It is only attested in a few words, yet [Sasse ](sources.bib?label=Sasse+#cldf:sasse1985a)([1985](sources.bib?label=1985#cldf:sasse1985a)) explicitly mentioned that it is borrowed.
- _-ós_ ‘verbalizer’, e.g. _ɲatrós_ ‘let oneself seduce’ (from _ɲátrə_ ‘another’), only attested in one word. [Sasse ](sources.bib?label=Sasse+#cldf:sasse1985a)([1985](sources.bib?label=1985#cldf:sasse1985a)) explicitly states that this form is borrowed.
- _-is-/-as-/-eks-_ ‘verbalizer’ to adapt loanwords from Italian that have a Greek etymology in Italian, as in the following examples from [Altimari ](sources.bib?label=Altimari+#cldf:altimari2011a)([2011](sources.bib?label=2011#cldf:altimari2011a):11): _ngol-is-ënj_ (&lt; _incollare_) ‘to paste’, compare Ancient Greek _κόλλα_ (_kólla_) ‘glue’; _shkerdhj-as-ënj_ (&lt; _scheggiare_) ‘to chip’, from Latin _schidia_ and ultimately Ancient Greek _σχίδια_ (_skhídia_) ‘chip’; _stirand-aks-ënj_ ~ _stirand-as-ënj_ (&lt; _stiracchiare_) ‘to stretch (washed clothes)’, probably from Ancient Greek _τείρω_ (_teírō_) ‘to wear out, rub’, via Latin.



11 adjectives used as derivational prefixes or as bound first elements of compounds, out of a total of 11 such forms in Arvanitic Albanian. They are used on nouns, i.e. as adjective-noun compounds ([Sasse 1991](sources.bib?label=Sasse+1991#cldf:sasse1991a):257–258). All are productive and, for most, various examples with Albanian stems are found.

- _aγrio-_ ‘wild’, e.g. _aγriodérr_ ‘wild boar’.
- _ðoʎo_- ‘poor’, e.g. _ðoʎonún_ ‘poor godfather’, only three attestations, all from songs.
- _meγalo-_ ‘big’, e.g. _meγalokopíʎe_ ‘old spinster’.
- _mes-_ ‘medium’, e.g. _mesnátə_ ‘midnight’.
- _mono-_ ‘single’, e.g. _monobíʎə_ ‘single daughter’.
- _mavro_- ‘black, pitiful’, e.g. _mavropʎák_ ‘poor old man’.
- _paʎo-_ ‘bad’ (very popular), e.g. _paʎodjáʎə_ ‘naughty child’.
- _psefto-_ ‘fake’, e.g. _pseftopúnǝ_ ‘superficial work’.
- _proto-_ ‘first’ (only one example given), e.g. _protohérǝ_ ‘for the first time’.
- _stravo-_ ‘crooked’ (only attested once), e.g. _stravogrúa_ ‘stubborn woman’.
- _vromo_- ‘dirty, smelly’, e.g. _vromopúnǝ_ ‘dirty work’.


Very rarely and only in songs, Albanian adjectives are also used in such constructions ([Sasse 1991](sources.bib?label=Sasse+1991#cldf:sasse1991a):258).


2 prepositions as derivational devices on nouns, out of a total of 3 in Arvanitic Albanian (the native Albanian form, not counted here, is _nənə_ ‘under’).

- _para-_ ‘next to’, e.g. _paratátǝ_ ‘stepfather’.
- _pro-_ ‘before’, e.g. _protátǝ_ ‘forefather’.



5 verbal derivational devices, as part of a systems of 8 Arvanitic Albanian ‘preverbs’; _kata_ is also used in this function, but it is not counted here again ([Sasse 1991](sources.bib?label=Sasse+1991#cldf:sasse1991a):262–267). These forms have entered the language as part of Greek complex loanwords, but they have become productive with Albanian stems.

- _apo-_ (different functions, only few cases), e.g. _apobǝ́nem_ ‘I become’, _apohíng(ǝ)ra_ ‘I ate up’.
- _kse-_ (different functions, like German _ent, aus, auf_, very frequent, also with Albanian verbs), e.g. _kseʎóð(əɲ)_ ‘let someone rest’.
- _ksana-_ ‘do x again’, e.g. _ksanaháp(əɲ)_ ‘open again’, very productive, also with Albanian stems.
- _para-_ ‘excessively’, e.g. _parahá_ ‘eat too much’.
- _kata-_ ‘intensifier’ (relatively rare), e.g. _kataʎóðem_ ‘I become very tired, i.e. I work too hard’. This form is also used as a derivational prefix on adjectives, participles, and adverbs (as part of a system of 2 such forms in Arvanitic Albanian, along with the native Albanian form _pa_ ‘without’), e.g. _kata-_ ‘very’, e.g. _katairi_ ‘brand new’ (from _iri_ ‘new’), _katanáni_ ‘right now’ (from _náni_ ‘now’).









4 verbal derivational devices as first elements of compounds ([Sasse 1991](sources.bib?label=Sasse+1991#cldf:sasse1991a):267).

- _kalo-_ ‘good’, e.g. _kalopagúan_ ‘pay well’.
- _kako-_ ‘bad’, e.g. _kakopagúan_ ‘pay badly’.
- _miso-_ ‘medium’, e.g. _misoháp(əɲ)_ ‘open partially’.
- _proto-_ ‘for the first time’, e.g. _protovéte_ ‘go for the first time’.






